README.md, before:

# Genomic Variant Annotation Pipeline

A Snakemake workflow for comprehensive genomic variant annotation using multiple data sources including regulatory elements, conservation scores, pathogenicity predictions, and population genetics data.

## Overview

This pipeline processes genomic variants in LD (Linkage Disequilibrium) blocks and annotates them with:
- **Cell-type specific regulatory elements** from single-cell atlas data
- **Conservation scores** from Zoonomia project (RoCCs and UCEs)
- **Regulatory information** from RegulomeDB
- **Pathogenicity predictions** from AlphaMissense
- **ENCODE cCRE** (candidate Cis-Regulatory Elements)
- **Population allele frequencies** from 1000 Genomes Project

## Requirements

### Software Dependencies
- Snakemake
- bedtools
- htslib
- DuckDB
- Python packages:
  - polars
  - pandas
  - yaml
- Conda/Mamba environments (see Environment Setup below)

### Environment Setup

This pipeline requires two conda/mamba environments that can be automatically created using the provided requirements files:

#### 1. Snakemake Environment
Create the main environment for running the Snakemake workflow:

```bash
# Using conda
conda create --name snakemake --file requirements_snakemake.txt

# Using mamba (recommended for faster installation)
mamba create --name snakemake --file requirements_snakemake.txt
```

#### 2. Parquet Environment 
Create the environment for data processing steps:

```bash
# Using conda
conda create --name parquet --file requirements_parquet.txt

# Using mamba (recommended for faster installation)  
mamba create --name parquet --file requirements_parquet.txt
```

#### Activating Environments

The Snakemake workflow will automatically activate the appropriate environments. However, you can manually activate them as needed:

```bash
# Activate snakemake environment to run the workflow
conda activate snakemake

# The parquet environment is automatically activated by rules that process data
# But you can manually activate it for testing:
conda activate parquet
```

**Note**: Make sure to update the paths to your conda/mamba activation scripts in `config.yaml`:
```yaml
CONDA: "/path/to/your/conda.sh"
MAMBA: "/path/to/your/mamba.sh"
```

### Input Data Sources

The pipeline requires the following input datasets configured in `config.yaml`:

1. **LD Blocks**: Pre-defined linkage disequilibrium blocks file
   - Estimates can be downloaded [here](https://github.com/jmacdon/LDblocks_GRCh38/tree/master/data)

2. **Regulatory Elements**:
   - **RoCC** (Regions of Conserved Constraint) from Zoonomia: [https://zoonomiaproject.org/](https://zoonomiaproject.org/)
   - **UCE** (Ultra-Conserved Elements) from Zoonomia: [https://zoonomiaproject.org/](https://zoonomiaproject.org/)
   - **Cell-type specific regulatory regions**: Single-cell atlas data from [Zhang et al. 2021](https://www.nature.com/articles/s41586-021-03604-1)
   - Download: 
   `bash
    wget https://cgl.gi.ucsc.edu/data/cactus/zoonomia-2021-track-hub/hg38/RoCCs.bed.gz
    wget https://cgl.gi.ucsc.edu/data/cactus/zoonomia-2021-track-hub/hg38/zooUCEs.bed.gz
    wget https://cgl.gi.ucsc.edu/data/cactus/zoonomia-2021-track-hub/hg38/UNICORNs.bed.gz
    `

3. **Regulatory Databases**:
   - **RegulomeDB**: [https://regulomedb.org/regulome-help/](https://regulomedb.org/regulome-help/) - Download bulk data
   - `bash
    wget https://www.encodeproject.org/files/ENCFF250UJY/@@download/ENCFF250UJY.tsv
    ln -s ENCFF250UJY.tsv regulomedb.tsv
   `
   - **dbSNP**: [https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/snp/](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/snp/) - NCBI dbSNP database

4. **Pathogenicity Scores**:
   - **AlphaMissense**: [https://github.com/google-deepmind/alphamissense](https://github.com/google-deepmind/alphamissense) - Download predictions

5. **Ancestry stratified allele frequencies**:
   - **1000 Genomes Project**: [https://www.internationalgenome.org/data/](https://www.internationalgenome.org/data/) - Allele frequency data

6. **ENCODE Data**:
   - **cCREs** (candidate Cis-Regulatory Elements): [https://screen.encodeproject.org/](https://screen.encodeproject.org/) - ENCODE SCREEN database
   - `bash wget https://downloads.wenglab.org/Registry-V4/GRCh38-cCREs.bed`

## Configuration

Edit `config.yaml` to specify paths to your input data:

```yaml
LD_blocks_file: "path/to/LD_blocks.bed"
RoCC: "path/to/RoCCs.bed.gz"
UCE: "path/to/zooUCEs.bed.gz"
ADULT_CELL_TYPE_DIR: "path/to/cell_type_beds"
REGULOME_DB_PATH: "path/to/regulomedb.tsv"
# ... (see config.yaml for full configuration)
```

## Usage

### Running the Complete Pipeline

```bash
# Run with cluster execution (SLURM)
bash run_cluster.sh

# Or run locally
snakemake -p -j <num_cores> --rerun-incomplete
```

### Key Output Files

- `{OUTPUT_DIR}/all_variants_annotated_complete.parquet`: Complete annotated variant dataset
- `{OUTPUT_DIR}/all_variants.bed`: Combined BED file of all variants
- `{OUTPUT_DIR}/{BLOCK}/variant_list_ccre_annotated_complete.parquet`: Per-block annotated variants

## Pipeline Workflow

### Step 1: Cell-type Regulatory Annotation (`ccre` rule)
- Converts variant lists to BED format
- Uses bedtools to annotate variants with:
  - Cell-type specific regulatory elements
  - RoCC conservation scores
  - UCE ultra-conserved elements

### Step 2: Database Preparation
- **`convert_regulome`**: Converts RegulomeDB TSV to Parquet format
- **`setid_regulome`**: Adds variant IDs using dbSNP reference
- **`convert_alpha`**: Processes AlphaMissense pathogenicity scores

### Step 3: Comprehensive Annotation (`add_more_annotations` rule)
- Merges variants with:
  - 1000 Genomes allele frequencies
  - RegulomeDB regulatory annotations
  - AlphaMissense pathogenicity scores
  - ENCODE cCRE elements

### Step 4: Data Collation
- **`collate_annotations`**: Combines all per-block annotations
- **`mega_bed`**: Creates unified BED file of all variants

## Scripts Description

### Core Scripts

- **`add_annotations.py`**: Main annotation script that merges variant data with multiple annotation sources
- **`collate_annotations.py`**: Combines multiple parquet files into a single dataset
- **`utils.py`**: Utility functions for data processing and merging operations

### Key Functions in `utils.py`

- `read_cCRE()`: Reads and processes ENCODE cCRE data
- `read_bed()`: Parses BED files with proper column typing
- `merge_regulomedb()`: Joins RegulomeDB annotations
- `merge_AlphaMissense()`: Adds pathogenicity predictions
- `merge_1KG()`: Incorporates population allele frequencies

## Output Annotations

Each variant is annotated with:

### Regulatory Elements
- Cell-type specific accessibility (multiple cell types)
- RoCC conservation scores
- UCE ultra-conserved element overlap

### Regulatory Information
- ChIP-seq evidence (`ChIP`)
- Chromatin accessibility (`Chromatin_accessibility`)
- QTL associations (`QTL`)
- PWM motif matches (`PWM`)

### Pathogenicity
- AlphaMissense pathogenicity score (`am_pathogenicity`)

### ENCODE cCREs
- Various cCRE types: `pELS`, `CA-CTCF`, `CA`, `CA-TF`, `dELS`, `TF`, `CA-H3K4me3`, `PLS`

### Population Genetics
- Allele frequencies across 1000 Genomes populations (multiple `AF_*` columns)

## Resource Requirements

- Memory: 3-18GB depending on the rule
- Time: 1-8 hours per rule
- Storage: Varies based on input data size

### Log Files

- `stdout.log`: Standard output from Snakemake execution
- `stderr.log`: Error messages and warnings
- Individual rule logs in `logs/` directory

## Citation

If you use this pipeline in your research, please cite the relevant data sources:
- RegulomeDB
- AlphaMissense
- ENCODE Project
- Zoonomia Consortium
- 1000 Genomes Project

## Contact

For questions or issues, please contact Josh Weinstock.

Commit message:

updating readme and adding in download helper script

README.md, after:

# Genomic Variant Annotation Pipeline

A Snakemake workflow for comprehensive genomic variant annotation using multiple data sources including regulatory elements, conservation scores, pathogenicity predictions, and population genetics data.

## Overview

This pipeline processes genomic variants in LD (Linkage Disequilibrium) blocks and annotates them with:
- **Cell-type specific regulatory elements** from single-cell atlas data
- **Conservation scores** from Zoonomia project (RoCCs and UCEs)
- **Regulatory information** from RegulomeDB
- **Pathogenicity predictions** from AlphaMissense
- **ENCODE cCRE** (candidate Cis-Regulatory Elements)
- **Population allele frequencies** from 1000 Genomes Project

## Requirements

### Software Dependencies
- Snakemake
- bedtools
- htslib
- DuckDB
- Python packages:
  - polars
  - pandas
  - yaml
- Conda/Mamba environments (see Environment Setup below)

### Environment Setup

This pipeline requires two conda/mamba environments that can be automatically created using the provided requirements files:

#### 1. Snakemake Environment
Create the main environment for running the Snakemake workflow:

```bash
# Using conda
conda create --name snakemake --file requirements_snakemake.txt

# Using mamba (recommended for faster installation)
mamba create --name snakemake --file requirements_snakemake.txt
```

#### 2. Parquet Environment 
Create the environment for data processing steps:

```bash
# Using conda
conda create --name parquet --file requirements_parquet.txt

# Using mamba (recommended for faster installation)  
mamba create --name parquet --file requirements_parquet.txt
```

#### Activating Environments

The Snakemake workflow will automatically activate the appropriate environments. However, you can manually activate them as needed:

```bash
# Activate snakemake environment to run the workflow
conda activate snakemake

# The parquet environment is automatically activated by rules that process data
# But you can manually activate it for testing:
conda activate parquet
```

**Note**: Make sure to update the paths to your conda/mamba activation scripts in `config.yaml`:
```yaml
CONDA: "/path/to/your/conda.sh"
MAMBA: "/path/to/your/mamba.sh"
```

### Input Data Sources

The pipeline requires the following input datasets configured in `config.yaml`:

1. **LD Blocks**: Pre-defined linkage disequilibrium blocks file
   - Estimates can be downloaded [here](https://github.com/jmacdon/LDblocks_GRCh38/tree/master/data)

2. **Regulatory Elements**:
   - **RoCC** (Regions of Conserved Constraint) from Zoonomia: [https://zoonomiaproject.org/](https://zoonomiaproject.org/)
   - **UCE** (Ultra-Conserved Elements) from Zoonomia: [https://zoonomiaproject.org/](https://zoonomiaproject.org/)
   - **Cell-type specific regulatory regions**: Single-cell atlas data from [Zhang et al. 2021](https://www.nature.com/articles/s41586-021-03604-1)
   - Download: 
   `bash
    wget https://cgl.gi.ucsc.edu/data/cactus/zoonomia-2021-track-hub/hg38/RoCCs.bed.gz
    wget https://cgl.gi.ucsc.edu/data/cactus/zoonomia-2021-track-hub/hg38/zooUCEs.bed.gz
    wget https://cgl.gi.ucsc.edu/data/cactus/zoonomia-2021-track-hub/hg38/UNICORNs.bed.gz
    `

3. **Regulatory Databases**:
   - **RegulomeDB**: [https://regulomedb.org/regulome-help/](https://regulomedb.org/regulome-help/) - Download bulk data
   - `bash
    wget https://www.encodeproject.org/files/ENCFF250UJY/@@download/ENCFF250UJY.tsv
    ln -s ENCFF250UJY.tsv regulomedb.tsv
   `
   - **dbSNP**: [https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/snp/](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/snp/) - NCBI dbSNP database

4. **Pathogenicity Scores**:
   - **AlphaMissense**: [https://github.com/google-deepmind/alphamissense](https://github.com/google-deepmind/alphamissense) - Download predictions

5. **Ancestry stratified allele frequencies**:
   - **1000 Genomes Project**: [https://www.internationalgenome.org/data/](https://www.internationalgenome.org/data/) - Allele frequency data

6. **ENCODE Data**:
   - **cCREs** (candidate Cis-Regulatory Elements): [https://screen.encodeproject.org/](https://screen.encodeproject.org/) - ENCODE SCREEN database
   - `bash wget https://downloads.wenglab.org/Registry-V4/GRCh38-cCREs.bed`

## Quick Setup with Download Script

🚀 **Get started quickly with our automated download script!**

You can easily download zoonmia/catlas/ENCODE/regulome/AlphaMissense data using our automated script:

```bash
# Download and check the script (recommended to verify before execution)
curl -sSL https://raw.githubusercontent.com/weinstockj/SNP_annotations/refs/heads/master/download_annotations_script.sh | wc -l

# Execute the download script directly
curl -sSL https://raw.githubusercontent.com/weinstockj/SNP_annotations/refs/heads/master/download_annotations_script.sh | bash

# Or download first, review, then execute
wget https://raw.githubusercontent.com/weinstockj/SNP_annotations/refs/heads/master/download_annotations_script.sh
chmod +x download_annotations_script.sh
./download_annotations_script.sh
```

This script will automatically download all the required annotation files mentioned in the Input Data Sources section below, saving you time and ensuring you have the correct versions.

Note that you will still need to separately download the 1000 Genomes allele frequency data and the dbSNP database, as these are large datasets that require manual download from their respective sources.


See [here](https://github.com/weinstockj/dbSNP_to_parquet) for a script to download the dbSNP VCF and then convert to Parquet format, which is required for the pipeline to help us merge in different sources.

See [here](https://github.com/weinstockj/download_high_depth_1kg) 
for a script to download the high depth 1000 Genomes allele frequency data, which is required for the pipeline.

## Configuration

After downloading the required data, you need to configure the pipeline settings:
Edit `config.yaml` to specify paths to your input data:

```yaml
LD_blocks_file: "path/to/LD_blocks.bed"
RoCC: "path/to/RoCCs.bed.gz"
UCE: "path/to/zooUCEs.bed.gz"
ADULT_CELL_TYPE_DIR: "path/to/cell_type_beds"
REGULOME_DB_PATH: "path/to/regulomedb.tsv"
# ... (see config.yaml for full configuration)
```

## Usage

### Running the Complete Pipeline

```bash
# Run with cluster execution (SLURM)
bash run_cluster.sh

# Or run locally
snakemake -p -j <num_cores> --rerun-incomplete
```

### Key Output Files

- `{OUTPUT_DIR}/all_variants_annotated_complete.parquet`: Complete annotated variant dataset
- `{OUTPUT_DIR}/all_variants.bed`: Combined BED file of all variants
- `{OUTPUT_DIR}/{BLOCK}/variant_list_ccre_annotated_complete.parquet`: Per-block annotated variants

## Pipeline Workflow

### Step 1: Cell-type Regulatory Annotation (`ccre` rule)
- Converts variant lists to BED format
- Uses bedtools to annotate variants with:
  - Cell-type specific regulatory elements
  - RoCC conservation scores
  - UCE ultra-conserved elements

### Step 2: Database Preparation
- **`convert_regulome`**: Converts RegulomeDB TSV to Parquet format
- **`setid_regulome`**: Adds variant IDs using dbSNP reference
- **`convert_alpha`**: Processes AlphaMissense pathogenicity scores

### Step 3: Comprehensive Annotation (`add_more_annotations` rule)
- Merges variants with:
  - 1000 Genomes allele frequencies
  - RegulomeDB regulatory annotations
  - AlphaMissense pathogenicity scores
  - ENCODE cCRE elements

### Step 4: Data Collation
- **`collate_annotations`**: Combines all per-block annotations
- **`mega_bed`**: Creates unified BED file of all variants

## Scripts Description

### Core Scripts

- **`add_annotations.py`**: Main annotation script that merges variant data with multiple annotation sources
- **`collate_annotations.py`**: Combines multiple parquet files into a single dataset
- **`utils.py`**: Utility functions for data processing and merging operations

### Key Functions in `utils.py`

- `read_cCRE()`: Reads and processes ENCODE cCRE data
- `read_bed()`: Parses BED files with proper column typing
- `merge_regulomedb()`: Joins RegulomeDB annotations
- `merge_AlphaMissense()`: Adds pathogenicity predictions
- `merge_1KG()`: Incorporates population allele frequencies

## Output Annotations

Each variant is annotated with:

### Regulatory Elements
- Cell-type specific accessibility (multiple cell types)
- RoCC conservation scores
- UCE ultra-conserved element overlap

### Regulatory Information
- ChIP-seq evidence (`ChIP`)
- Chromatin accessibility (`Chromatin_accessibility`)
- QTL associations (`QTL`)
- PWM motif matches (`PWM`)

### Pathogenicity
- AlphaMissense pathogenicity score (`am_pathogenicity`)

### ENCODE cCREs
- Various cCRE types: `pELS`, `CA-CTCF`, `CA`, `CA-TF`, `dELS`, `TF`, `CA-H3K4me3`, `PLS`

### Population Genetics
- Allele frequencies across 1000 Genomes populations (multiple `AF_*` columns)

## Resource Requirements

- Memory: 3-18GB depending on the rule
- Time: 1-8 hours per rule
- Storage: Varies based on input data size

### Log Files

- `stdout.log`: Standard output from Snakemake execution
- `stderr.log`: Error messages and warnings
- Individual rule logs in `logs/` directory

## Citation

If you use this pipeline in your research, please cite the relevant data sources:
- RegulomeDB
- AlphaMissense
- ENCODE Project
- Zoonomia Consortium
- 1000 Genomes Project

## Contact

For questions or issues, please contact Josh Weinstock.
